hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery back
again with the Chinese sayings podcast
season 3 opener of 10
nice Chung use all lined up for you and
the theme for this season will be
soldiers and heroes every episode will
feature a Chung you staring a military
person or someone who exhibited heroic
tendencies today is the first of a
two-part miniseries that features
Chinese sayings they came from one
respected warring States hero he was
from the state of Joe and his name was
Lin Chang rule
that's fourth tone Lin not the usual
Shuang moline later on in the Han
Dynasty one of the great poets musicians
and court officials samaa Shang Wu the
pride of Chengdu she was so inspired by
our hero today that she adopted his name
so from Lin Chang grew were getting not
one but two famous and memorable Cheung
you and today we look at the one that
came first this was one be cui Joe just
like almost all of our featured sayings
in the season one in season two this
Cheung you has four characters and as
usual let's break them apart one the
first character means finish are
complete second character be maybe
you've seen these before
a B is a flat J disk that has hole in
the middle in the old days it was an
object used in rituals and ceremonies
these days there a chinatown gift shop
stalwart one be the complete be a
complete jade grey means to give back or
return something and jaw well this
refers to the warring kingdom of jaw
also a common Chinese surname
present-day jaws state would be spread
out over the provinces of Hebei shen shi
shun Ishii and inner mongolia ground
zero ancient china
Quay Joe return to Joe and then we
string all four characters together one
be queen
ciao and we have complete Jade return -
ciao
and if you're familiar with the
following story then this all makes
sense to you if not just sit right back
and you'll hear a tale a tale of a
fateful trip so as I was saying lean
Shang Guru was this model court official
who was upright and served his King King
Qin of Chao to his utmost ability rather
than always trying to find ways to line
his pockets he always kept the best
interests of the state and his top
priority is Simha Qin wrote in the
records of the grand historian the sure
G under king way one chose fortunes
peaked but they had a badass next-door
neighbor who had grand designs on them
not to mention the other five states
left over from the Jo dynasty this
predator of course was the kingdom of
Chien led by the yin clan and their
current ruler chou-heung building on all
the reforms previous to his reign had
completely transformed Xin into a
fighting force that had quickly earned a
reputation for their discipline and
viciousness on the battlefield and as I
said Qing Chun was looking for a few
good acquisitions as our story goes one
day beckon Han dong the capital of jalle
King Cailan received a diplomat from Xin
who had an offer from King chou-heung
the chin king in the missive said that
he had heard it through the grapevine
that the famous huh sure be this fabled
Jade bee ornament had somehow come into
the possession of the jaw King Josh
Young was about midway through a 57 year
reign and he was one of those rulers who
when he wanted something he wanted it
now no excuses and this piece of jade
had quit Providence - it was even
mentioned in the Han fades the classic
work that forms the central nervous
system of legal astone
283 BCE chaozhong told his messenger
to go to Han dong and promise King
Cailan that in exchange for this Jade B
he was offering 15 cities inside Shin
that he would hand over to cha I wasn't
a small price I mean you could tax farm
those places and make a hefty sum
not to mention conscription and laborers
in their 15 cities the chow King way one
called his most trusted adviser li Shang
grew and instructed him to take the huh
sure be to the chain capital at Xi'an
yang near modern-day Xian and hand over
the B for these 15 cities Dean Shang Wu
was a little bit smarter than his
sovereign and he knew King chou-heung of
Qin was a man who famously couldn't be
trusted so Lin was wary about this offer
as well as this mission but the order
came from his King so he had no choice
in the matter just the same he decided
to show extra caution and handing over
the Jade li Shang Wu thereupon
started heading west in the direction of
Chien the huh sure B was with him at all
times he had promised his king that he
would carry out this job for him and if
the chain rule arene egged on his side
of the bargain
he'd returned the hood sure beat a jaw
all in one piece he arrived in Xi'an
yang and li Shang Wu on behalf of the
king of Zhao ceremoniously handed over
the Jade to Qing Chun and then Lin Chang
guru retired to his suite of rooms to
wait for the deeds and documents to be
handed over giving Chao title to these
promised 15 cities well to make a long
story short li Shang Wu wasn't far from
the mark with respect to what followed
he called that one right he waited and
waited and waited and of course Qing
Chun decayed him didn't know who he was
when lien shang wu started pressing the
King to honor his side of the deal so
now all was out in the open
King Jo Shang was telling li Shang Wu
and therefore the state of Jo thanks for
the Fisher B I decided not to hand over
the
fifteen cities in return so lien genre
was in a bit of a bind Qing Chun had the
Hosier B and the 15 states so Lina Shang
Wu couldn't go back to JA empty-handed
especially not if they're making such a
solemn promise to his king so he came up
with a plan he spread word around that
the Hosier B had a flaw in it that
greatly diminished its value as a ritual
or ceremonial object now one of the
Chien Kings men ran back and told him
this and Jiao Zhang was up in arms
what flaw what was wrong with that no
one ever said anything like this before
so with the hooker B in hand the King
summoned Lin Shang Wu to his palace and
demanded to know what's up with that
so Lin Shang Wu talked the Hosier B from
Qing Xiao Qiang and jumped back and
raised it above his head and threatened
to smash it to pieces on the ground of
anyone tried to molest him and he
furthermore said he would smash his head
against one of the pillars in the palace
and bash his own brains out and this
through the palace into an uproar you
didn't see something like this every day
hlne Shang Wu at last demanded the
king wait three days fast and reflect on
this matter or else
well everyone retired to their sides and
for the next three days things settled
down this was 283 BCE
no one knew yet that in 61 years that
Chien would defeat all the warring
States and unify China and start an
empire and li Shang Guru was a diplomat
from job and causing him any harm or
coming under suspicion for a diplomat's
death was as a major headache back in
the Eastern Cho days so most monarchs
wanted to avoid getting caught up in
these kinds of diplomatic uproars
before meeting again with Qing Chun Lin
Shang Wu passed the huh sure be to one
of his underlings and instructed him to
head back to Han dong 750 kilometers
away posthaste the trusty aide took off
at once and did just as instructed
returning to Han dong via a nun
Joe and onion lin xiao rou however he
remained behind and chained to face the
music he had deceived the king of
chained but didn't Qing Cheng cheat Lin
Xiao Rou by promising the 15 cities in
return for the hood sure B what could he
do and was all out in the open and
everybody knew he couldn't kill him now
I mean what would people say so with his
teeth grinding and seething with anger
the King allowed Lena Shang grew to
return home to Joe and Lynn arrived back
in Han dong and was given a hero's
welcome this was his big moment he had
not only brought the huh sure be back to
Joe intact all in one piece as promised
he had also stood up to the king of
Chien and showed him that job people had
some backbone his political career
really took off and in no time at all he
was chief minister to the king of Joe
bad and as he could imagine this matter
of one be the complete B meaning the
Hosier B being Quay returned to Joe it
was a big deal back then one be qui Joe
the whole Jade returned to Joe when you
say you're gonna give something back to
someone or return something to its
rightful owner and that's a 1b queen
child situation this Cheung you doesn't
have that many uses but I can tell you
over the last 30 years or so I found
myself in a few situations where I used
it myself always getting a good laugh
okay that was the inside word on li
Shang Wu Xin Zhao Shang Wang and Chao
Wei when Wang next week will look at the
sequel to this story
yes lean Shang Wu makes an encore
appearance so be looking for that until
then Masami season 3 we're off and
running
this is Laszlo Montgomery signing off
from Los Angeles California
I'm not going anywhere so do consider
coming back next week for another juicy
Chinese saying it'll be a good one I
promise take care everyone
you